Add OpenSearch performance blog for 3.3 (#4023)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-12-01-opensearch-performance-3.3.md

has_science_table: true
excerpt: Learn more about the strategic enhancements and performance features that OpenSearch has delivered up to version 3.3.
featured_blog_post: false
featured_image: false
---

OpenSearch 3.3 represents another major step forward in performance and innovation. The first version in the 3.x series, OpenSearch 3.0, which was released on May 6, 2025, delivered a 10× improvement in search performance and a 2.5× improvement in vector performance. Building on that foundation, the latest 3.3 release, launched on October 14, 2025, adds further enhancements in query processing, indexing, and artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) capabilities. In this blog post, we'll provide a detailed update of OpenSearch 3.3's performance improvements, focusing on search query latency, indexing throughput, and emerging workloads such as vector search and hybrid (semantic and lexical) search. To ensure transparency and real-world relevance, all results are supported by benchmarks using the Big5 workload.  

> In OpenSearch 3.3, query latencies have decreased on average **~11x** compared to OpenSearch 1.3 on our standard Big5 benchmark suite. These improvements result from numerous enhancements, including a new high-performance gRPC transport layer, smarter query execution strategies, optimized data structures for aggregations, and advanced vector processing optimizations. In the following sections, we'll describe these improvements, present our benchmark results, and share our roadmap for 2026, which outlines plans to continue advancing performance across all areas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In OpenSearch 3.3, query latencies have decreased on average **~11×** compared to OpenSearch 1.3 on our standard Big5 benchmark suite. These improvements result from numerous enhancements, including a new high-performance gRPC transport layer, smarter query execution strategies, optimized data structures for aggregations, and advanced vector processing optimizations. In the following sections, we'll describe these improvements, present our benchmark results, and share our roadmap for 2026, which outlines plans to continue advancing performance across all areas.
```

        <tr>
            <td colspan=2 class="bold left gray-clr">Relative latency, compared to OS 1.3 (geo mean)</td>
            <td>100%</td>
            <td>82.31%</td>
            <td>32.60%</td>
            <td>15.49%</td>
            <td>13.34%</td>
            <td class="lightest-green-clr">10.09%</td>
            <td class="lightest-green-clr">9.66%</td>
            <td class="lightest-green-clr">8.81%</td>
            <td class="green-clr">8.82%</td>
        </tr>
</tbody>
</table>

_The **Aggregate (geo mean)** row shows the geometric mean latency (ms) across all Big5 benchmark operations by OpenSearch version (lower is better)._

_The **Speedup factor, compared to OS 1.3 (geo mean)** row shows the speedup factor compared to OpenSearch 1.3 (higher is better)._

_The **Relative latency, compared to OS 1.3 (geo mean)** row shows relative latency as a percentage of OpenSearch 1.3 performance (lower is better)._

### Key performance improvements

OpenSearch 3.3 introduces several major performance enhancements, along with improvements added incrementally in 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2. The following are the most impactful changes implemented since the last performance blog:

> * **New gRPC/protobuf transport layer**: OpenSearch 3.3 uses the high-performance [gRPC transport layer](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/grpc-apis/index/), generally available in 3.2, for efficient inter-node communication. The gRPC module replaces the previous REST/JSON APIs with compact Protocol Buffers, reducing payload sizes and processing overhead. This transport is used for performance-critical operations such as bulk indexing and k-NN (vector) search. Initial benchmarks of gRPC in [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3972#issuecomment-3439369642) show **3--4% lower service latencies**, **~50% reduction in client-side processing time**, and **~20% higher throughput** for vector search workloads. Beyond these immediate gains, the gRPC layer enables more efficient client integrations and multi-node query parallelism in the future. Special thanks to Uber, a premier member of the OpenSearch Foundation, for contributing to this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **New gRPC/protobuf transport layer**: OpenSearch 3.3 uses the high-performance [gRPC transport layer](https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/api-reference/grpc-apis/index/), generally available in 3.2, for efficient inter-node communication. The gRPC module replaces the previous REST/JSON APIs with compact Protocol Buffers, reducing payload sizes and processing overhead. This transport is used for performance-critical operations such as bulk indexing and k-NN (vector) search. Initial benchmarks of gRPC in [OpenSearch Benchmark](https://github.com/opensearch-project/project-website/issues/3972#issuecomment-3439369642) show **3--4% lower service latencies**, **~50% reduction in client-side processing time**, and **~20% higher throughput** for vector search workloads. Beyond these immediate gains, the gRPC layer will enable more efficient client integrations and multi-node query parallelism in the future. Special thanks to Uber, a premier member of the OpenSearch Foundation, for contributing to this feature.
```

* **Text queries**: Text search operations are **~89% faster** in OpenSearch 3.3 compared to 1.3. A typical full-text query that took ~60 ms now completes in ~6.4 ms. These improvements result from optimizations like the `match_only_text` field type and enhanced query execution.
* **Terms aggregations**: Aggregating high-cardinality terms (such as finding the top-K most frequent terms) is **~87% faster** than in 1.3, with latencies decreasing from ~609 ms to ~79 ms in our tests. The 2.x series introduced major optimizations in this area, and 3.x extends them with features like star-tree and streaming aggregations for even more efficient performance on large aggregations.

* **Date histograms**: Time histogram queries (for example, bucketing events by hour or day) show ~98% lower latency in OpenSearch 3.3 compared to 1.3. In our benchmark, a date histogram on a ~100-GB log index dropped from ~6 seconds in OpenSearch 1.3 to ~0.09 seconds in OpenSearch 3.3---a ~60× speedup. These gains are driven by features such as skip list indexing and concurrent segment processing, which make time-based aggregations extremely fast.

> * **Range queries**: Numeric range filtering (such as finding all values between two numbers) executes **~90% faster** in OpenSearch 3.3 than in 1.3, decreasing from 26 ms to ~2.6 ms. Much of this improvement originated in OpenSearch 3.0, when the new range query approximation framework became generally available. By using indexed bounds and block skipping, the framework avoids scanning irrelevant data. Combined with other engine optimizations, this feature makes range filters highly efficient in OpenSearch 3.3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Range queries**: Numeric range filtering (such as finding all values between 2 numbers) executes **~90% faster** in OpenSearch 3.3 than in 1.3, decreasing from 26 ms to ~2.6 ms. Much of this improvement originated in OpenSearch 3.0, when the new range query approximation framework became generally available. By using indexed bounds and block skipping, the framework avoids scanning irrelevant data. Combined with other engine optimizations, this feature makes range filters highly efficient in OpenSearch 3.3.
```

![Memory-optimized search performance improvements](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-12-01-opensearch-performance-3.3/memory-optimized-performance-improvement.png){:style="width: 100%; max-width: 800px; height: auto; text-align: center"}

* **GPU performance**: OpenSearch's vector engine also gained features beyond core performance improvements, including GPU-accelerated k-NN indexing (OpenSearch 3.0) for **9× faster** index builds, disk-based approximate nearest neighbor (ANN) search with hybrid quantization (OpenSearch 3.1), and advanced filtering for multi-tenant vector data.

## Hybrid search 

> OpenSearch supports hybrid search queries that combine traditional keyword search with semantic vector search, allowing you to find documents using both exact keywords and semantic similarity. The hybrid search feature has been continuously optimized for better performance. OpenSearch 3.1 introduced a custom hybrid bulk scorer that takes full advantage of concurrent segment search, resulting in up to **65% faster responses** and **3.5x higher throughput** for hybrid queries compared to previous OpenSearch versions. The throughput improvements are shown in the following image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
OpenSearch supports hybrid search queries that combine traditional keyword search with semantic vector search, allowing you to find documents using both exact keywords and semantic similarity. The hybrid search feature has been continually optimized for better performance. OpenSearch 3.1 introduced a custom hybrid bulk scorer that takes full advantage of concurrent segment search, resulting in up to **65% faster responses** and **3.5× higher throughput** for hybrid queries compared to previous OpenSearch versions. The throughput improvements are shown in the following image.
```

### gRPC-based search API

> Work continues to close the gap between the REST API and gRPC, including additional benchmarks demonstrating gRPC benefits. This effort covers 50+ aggregation types—such as `date_histogram`, `terms`, `cardinality`, `stats`, `percentiles`, geographic aggregations, and others, which are being added to the protobuf schema and implemented in the gRPC transport module. This ensures that the gRPC API can fully support the range of aggregation capabilities available in OpenSearch for analytics and data exploration workloads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Work continues on closing the gap between the REST API and gRPC, including additional benchmarks demonstrating gRPC benefits. This effort covers 50+ aggregation types—such as `date_histogram`, `terms`, `cardinality`, `stats`, `percentiles`, geographic aggregations, and others, which are being added to the protobuf schema and implemented in the gRPC transport module. This ensures that the gRPC API can fully support the range of aggregation capabilities available in OpenSearch for analytics and data exploration workloads.
```

### Vector search

OpenSearch is continuing to enhance its vector search capabilities to support more efficient, scalable, and extensible workflows for high-dimensional data. Key initiatives include:

* **[Adding support for BFloat16 with Faiss scalar quantizer for extended range](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2510)**: Adding BFloat16 support to the Faiss scalar quantizer will allow the k-NN plugin to overcome the range limitation of the existing FP16 implementation. FP16 restricts input vectors to [-65,504, 65,504] and prevents it from being a default data type, despite its 50% memory reduction and comparable performance to FP32. BFloat16 (SQbf16) provides the same extended range as FP32 (approximately ±3.4 × 10³⁸) while maintaining 50% memory savings by trading off precision, supporting 2–3 decimal values (7 mantissa bits). The k-NN engine can use Intel AVX512 BF16 instruction sets for hardware-accelerated performance on newer processors. This makes 16-bit quantization viable for a wider range of vector search use cases without range constraints.

> * **[Moving k-NN interfaces to OpenSearch core](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/20050)**: Moving k-NN vector interfaces from the k-NN plugin to OpenSearch core will address extensibility challenges and plugin dependencies in the growing vector search landscape. Currently, the k-NN plugin (supporting Lucene, Faiss, and the deprecated NMSLib engines) and the newer JVector plugin each implement their own interfaces, but there is no standardized approach. This proposal aims to elevate the common Lucene-based k-NN interfaces into OpenSearch core. Doing so will enable better extensibility for new vector engines, remove the hard dependency of the Neural Search plugin relying on the k-NN plugin, and allow any vector plugin (k-NN, JVector, or future engines) to integrate with the Neural Search plugin. It also provides a standardized contract that simplifies onboarding and encourages innovation in the vector search space.

Reviewer 2: @navneet1v requested to delete `Moving k-NN interfaces to OpenSearch core`, since its not performance related.

@vamshin do you want to add more here instead?

Reviewer 2: Add:

* Making Memory Optimized Search Default: In the 3.3 version of OpenSearch k-NN, we observed a significant improvement with Memory Optimized by taking in the HNSW graph traversal algorithm from the Lucene library and C++ bulk SIMD-based distance computation. Further down the road, we are planning to add more optimizations, which include a [warmup](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2939) on the memory-optimized based search indices to reduce the tail latencies, making [fp16 the default with Memory Optimized search](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2924) to reduce the memory footprint by 2x.
* Disk Based Vector Search V2: In the 2.17 version, the OpenSearch k-NN plugin added [disk-based vector search support](https://opensearch.org/blog/Reduce-Cost-with-Disk-based-Vector-Search/), allowing searches to run in lower-memory environments. In the V2 of Disk-based Vector Search, we will be working on reducing the disk reads by reordering the vectors on the disk to maximize the number of vectors retrieved per disk access using techniques like Bi-partite Graph Partitioning (BPGP) and Gorder Priority Queue (Gorder-PQ). Along with this, we will be adding different flavors of Better Binary Quantization (flat and approximate search) in the Vector Engine.
* Accelerating indexing and search: OpenSearch continues to leverage hardware acceleration using new SIMD instructions like [avx512_fp16](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/pull/4225), BFloat16, and ARM SVE to boost search performance on x86 and ARM-based instances. Further for remote index build using GPUs we are planning to cut down the [index file transfer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/remote-vector-index-builder/issues/94) to and fro from GPUs machine. This is expected to improve the index builds using GPUs by 2x.
* [Making OpenSearch Vector Engine Extensible](https://github.com/opensearch-project/OpenSearch/issues/20050): OpenSearch is proposing to move Vector Search interfaces from the k-NN plugin to OpenSearch core to address extensibility challenges and plugin dependencies in the growing vector search ecosystem, where currently the k-NN plugin (supporting Lucene, FAISS) and the newer JVector plugin operate with their own implementations but lack standardized interfaces. The proposal aims to uplevel common Vector Search interfaces—into opensearch-core, enabling better extensibility for new vector engines, eliminating the problematic hard dependency where the neural-search plugin (used for hybrid search) currently relies directly on the k-NN plugin, and allowing you to choose any vector plugin (k-NN, JVector, or future engines) with neural-search while providing a standardized contract that simplifies onboarding new vector engines and encourages innovation in the vector search space.

### Vector search

OpenSearch continues to enhance its vector search capabilities to support more efficient, scalable, and extensible workflows for high-dimensional data. Key initiatives include:

* **Adding support for BFloat16 with Faiss scalar quantizer for extended range**: [Adding BFloat16 support to the Faiss scalar quantizer](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2510) will allow the k-NN plugin to overcome the range limitation of the existing FP16 implementation. FP16 restricts input vectors to [-65,504, 65,504] and prevents it from being a default data type, despite its 50% memory reduction and comparable performance to FP32. BFloat16 (SQbf16) provides the same extended range as FP32 (approximately ±3.4 × 10³⁸) while maintaining 50% memory savings by trading off precision, supporting 2–3 decimal values (7 mantissa bits). The k-NN engine can use Intel AVX512 BF16 instruction sets for hardware-accelerated performance on newer processors. This makes 16-bit quantization viable for a wider range of vector search use cases without range constraints.

> * **Making memory-optimized search default**: In OpenSearch 3.3, the k-NN plugin achieved significant improvements with memory-optimized search by combining the HNSW graph traversal algorithm from the Lucene library with C++ bulk SIMD-based distance computation. Future optimizations include adding [warmup functionality](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2939) for memory-optimized search indices to reduce tail latencies and [making FP16 the default](https://github.com/opensearch-project/k-NN/issues/2924) with memory-optimized search to reduce memory footprint by 50%.

Reviewer: "the" should precede the first instance of "default". "indices" => "indexes"
